Add property type constraints (#597)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/constraints/examples.adoc

----

[role=enterprise-edition]
[[constraints-examples-node-property-type]]
== Node property type constraints

> A node property type constraint ensures that for all nodes with a certain label and property, the property is of the required property type.

Reviewer: This suggestion may be overly simple, but I think it is a little bit easier to follow. 
```suggestion
_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.9._

A node property type constraint ensures that a property belonging to certain nodes has the required property type.
```

Author: about the rephrasing: I think this follows the pattern we have in other sections so if we change it here maybe we should also update it for the other constraints

Author: ```suggestion
_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.9._

A node property type constraint ensures that for all nodes with a certain label and property, the property is of the required property type.
```

> The allowed property types for the constraints is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The allowed property types for the constraints are:
```

* `BOOLEAN`
* `STRING`
* `INTEGER`
* `FLOAT`
* `DATE`
* `LOCAL TIME`
* `ZONED TIME`
* `LOCAL DATETIME`
* `ZONED DATETIME`
* `DURATION`
* `POINT`

> For all available Cypher types see xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[Types and their synonyms].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For all available Cypher types. see the section on xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[types and their synonyms].
```

Author: that `.` in the middle does not seem to be correct
```suggestion
For all available Cypher types see the section on xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[types and their synonyms].
```

Author: comparing with the relationship version it should be a `,`
```suggestion
For all available Cypher types, see the section on xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[types and their synonyms].
```

* xref::constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-create-a-node-property-type-constraint[]
* xref::constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-create-a-node-property-type-constraint-if-not-exist[]
* xref::constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-create-an-already-existing-node-property-type-constraint[]
* xref::constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-create-a-different-than-existing-node-property-type-constraint[]
* xref::constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-create-a-node-that-complies-with-a-property-type-constraint[]
* xref::constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-create-a-node-that-violates-a-property-type-constraint[]
* xref::constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-fail-to-create-a-property-type-constraint-due-to-existing-node[]

[discrete]
[[constraints-create-a-node-property-type-constraint]]
=== Create a node property type constraint

> When creating a node property type constraint, a name can be provided.

Reviewer: I realise you are following what is already on the page, but for indexes we say that best practice is to give a name upon creation. Should we not do the same for constraints? (If yes, I can update for the other instances of this sentence on the page).  

```suggestion
When creating a node property type constraint, it is recommended to provide a constraint name.
```

Author: as with everything else, this is currently consistent with the other constraints sections and should therefore be updated for all of them

Reviewer: @Hunterness - agreed that the page should be consistent, but that may not be within the scope of this PR. Given that 5.9 is already out, I believe the best action now is to accept (where you think appropriate) the stylistic changes, and then I can come back to this page and make sure the other examples follow with these new style suggestions.

Author: ✅

.+CREATE CONSTRAINT+
======

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT movie_title
FOR (movie:Movie) REQUIRE movie.title IS :: STRING
----

.Result
[queryresult]
----
Added 1 constraint.
----

======

[discrete]
[[constraints-create-a-node-property-type-constraint-if-not-exist]]
=== Handling existing constraints when creating a constraint

Creating an already existing constraint will fail.
To avoid such an error, `IF NOT EXISTS` can be added to the `CREATE` command.

> This will ensure that no error is thrown and no constraint is created if any other constraint with the given name or another node property type constraint on the same schema and property type already existed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will ensure that no error is thrown and that no constraint is created if any other constraint with the given name, or another node property type constraint on the same schema and property type, already exists.
```

Author: I think this follows the pattern we have in other sections so if we change it here maybe we should also update it for the other constraints

Author: ✅

.+CREATE CONSTRAINT+
======

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT movie_titles IF NOT EXISTS
FOR (movie:Movie) REQUIRE movie.title :: STRING
----

> Assuming a node property type constraint on label `Movie` and restricting property `title` to string values already existed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming a node property type constraint on the label `Movie` which restricts the property `title` to string values already exists:
```

Author: I think this follows the pattern we have in other sections so if we change it here maybe we should also update it for the other constraints

Author: ✅

.Result
[queryresult]
----
(no changes, no records)
----

======

[discrete]
[[constraints-create-an-already-existing-node-property-type-constraint]]
=== Creating an already existing constraint will fail

.+CREATE CONSTRAINT+
======

> Create a node property type constraint restricting the property `title` to string values on nodes with the `Movie` label, when that constraint already exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a node property type constraint restricting the property `title` to string values on nodes with the `Movie` label, when that constraint already exists:
```

Author: I believe this would also need updating in the other constraint sections as well then

Author: ✅

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT movies
FOR (movie:Movie) REQUIRE movie.title IS TYPED STRING
----

> In this case the constraint can not be created because it already exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the constraint cannot be created because it already exists.
```

Author: I think this follows the pattern we have in other sections so if we change it here maybe we should also update it for the other constraints

Author: ✅

Author: ✅

.Error message
[source, error]
----
Constraint already exists: Constraint( id=22, name='movie_title', type='NODE PROPERTY TYPE', schema=(:Movie {title}), propertyType=STRING )
----

======

[discrete]
[[constraints-create-a-different-than-existing-node-property-type-constraint]]

> === Creating a constraint when an already existing constraint with different property type will fail

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Creating a constraint when there is an existing constraint with a different property type will fail
```

Author: we have other sections with existing constraints, should probably make sure they are somewhat consistent in their names so this one don't stick out

.+CREATE CONSTRAINT+
======

> Create a node property type constraint restricting the property `seriesOrder` to float values on nodes with the `Movie` label, when a node property type constraint restricting the property `seriesOrder` to integer values already exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a node property type constraint restricting the property `seriesOrder` to float values on nodes with the `Movie` label, when a node property type constraint restricting the property `seriesOrder` to integer values already exists:
```

Author: ✅

////
[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT seriesOrder
FOR (movie:Movie) REQUIRE movie.seriesOrder IS :: INTEGER
----
////

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT order
FOR (movie:Movie) REQUIRE movie.seriesOrder IS :: FLOAT
----

> In this case the constraint can not be created because there exists a conflicting constraint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the constraint cannot be created because there exists a conflicting constraint.
```

Author: ✅

.Error message
[source, error]
----
Constraint already exists: Constraint( id=23, name='seriesOrder', type='NODE PROPERTY TYPE', schema=(:Movie {seriesOrder}), propertyType=INTEGER )
----

======

[discrete]
[[constraints-create-a-node-that-complies-with-a-property-type-constraint]]
=== Creating a node that complies with an existing constraint

.+CREATE NODE+
======

Create an `Movie` node with a string `title` property.

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE (movie:Movie {title:'Iron Man'})
----

.Result
[queryresult]
----
Added 1 label, created 1 node, set 1 properties
----

======

[discrete]
[[constraints-create-a-node-that-violates-a-property-type-constraint]]
=== Creating a node that violates an existing constraint will fail

.+CREATE NODE+
======

> Trying to create an `Movie` node with an integer `title` property, given a property type constraint on label `Movie` restricting `title` to string values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a `Movie` node with an integer `title` property, given a property type constraint on the  label `Movie` restricting  the `title` property to string values:
```

Author: I think this follows the pattern we have in other sections so if we change it here maybe we should also update it for the other constraints

Author: ✅

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
CREATE (movie:Movie {title: 123})
----

> In this case the node is not created in the graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the node is not created because the `title` property is in conflict with an existing constraint.
```

Author: Here as well, if we expand it here we should do that for all constraint types

Author: ✅

.Error message
[source, error]
----

> Node(0) with label `Movie` has property `Long(123)` of wrong type `Long`. Allowed types: STRING

Author: This error message has been updated
```suggestion
Node(0) with label `Movie` has property `title` of wrong type `Long`. Allowed types: STRING
```

----

======

[discrete]
[[constraints-fail-to-create-a-property-type-constraint-due-to-existing-node]]
=== Creating a constraint when there exist conflicting nodes will fail

.+CREATE CONSTRAINT+
======

> Create a constraint restricting the property `franchise` to string on nodes with the `Movie` label when there already exists a node with a boolean `franchise` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a constraint restricting the property `franchise` to string values on nodes with the `Movie` label when there already exists a node with a boolean `franchise` property:
```

Author: ✅

////
[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE (movie:Movie {title:'Captain America: The First Avenger', franchise: true})
----
////

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT movie_franchise FOR (movie:Movie) REQUIRE movie.franchise IS :: STRING
----

> In this case the constraint can't be created because it is violated by existing data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the constraint cannot be created because it is in conflict with an existing constraint.
```

Author: It's not in conflict with an existing constraint though, it's in conflict with the existing graph, we are trying to create the constraint

Author: ✅

> Remove the offending nodes and then re-apply the constraint.

Reviewer: Is this a recommendation to the reader?

Author: Yes, it's the same thing we have for the other constraints, could probably say something like `remove or correct the offending nodes` but I'd also like to go over the other constraints to see if any of them should also be updated in that case

Author: ✅

.Error message
[source, error]
----
Unable to create Constraint( name='movie_franchise', type='NODE PROPERTY TYPE', schema=(:Movie {franchise}), propertyType=STRING ):

> Node(0) with label `Movie` has property `Boolean('true')` of wrong type `Boolean`. Allowed types: STRING

Author: This error message has been updated
```suggestion
Node(0) with label `Movie` has property `franchise` of wrong type `Boolean`. Allowed types: STRING
```

----

======

The constraint creation fails on the first offending node that is found.

> This does not guarantee that there are no other offending nodes in the data.

Reviewer: Maybe data is more correct in this context, it's just that we usually refers to nodes as in a graph. 
```suggestion
This does not guarantee that there are no other offending nodes in the graph.
```

Author: This is probably the same sentence in the other constraint sections as well so it should be updated everywhere

Therefore, all the data should be checked and cleaned up before re-attempting the constraint creation.

// TODO: re-add this together with type expressions docs
////
This is an example `MATCH` query to find all offending nodes with the wrong property type for the constraint above:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (movie:Movie)
WHERE movie.franchise IS NOT :: STRING
RETURN movie
----
////

[role=enterprise-edition]
[[constraints-examples-relationship-property-type]]
== Relationship property type constraints

> A relationship property type constraint ensures that for all relationships with a certain relationship type and property, the property is of the required property type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.9._

A relationship property type constraint ensures that a property belonging to a certain relationship type is of the required property type.
```

Author: ```suggestion
_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.9._

A relationship property type constraint ensures that for all relationships with a certain relationship type and property, the property is of the required property type.
```

The allowed property types for the constraints is:

* `BOOLEAN`
* `STRING`
* `INTEGER`
* `FLOAT`
* `DATE`
* `LOCAL TIME`
* `ZONED TIME`
* `LOCAL DATETIME`
* `ZONED DATETIME`
* `DURATION`
* `POINT`

> For all available Cypher types see xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[Types and their synonyms].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For all available Cypher types, see the section on xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[types and their synonyms].
```

* xref::constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-create-a-different-than-existing-relationship-property-type-constraint[]
* xref::constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-create-a-relationship-that-complies-with-a-property-type-constraint[]
* xref::constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-create-a-relationship-that-violates-a-property-type-constraint[]
* xref::constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-fail-to-create-a-property-type-constraint-due-to-existing-relationship[]

[discrete]
[[constraints-create-a-relationship-property-type-constraint]]
=== Create a relationship property type constraint

When creating a relationship property type constraint, a name can be provided.

.+CREATE CONSTRAINT+
======

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT part_of
FOR ()-[part:PART_OF]-() REQUIRE part.order IS :: INTEGER
----

.Result
[queryresult]
----
Added 1 constraint.
----

======

[discrete]
[[constraints-create-a-relationship-property-type-constraint-if-not-exist]]
=== Handling existing constraints when creating a constraint

Creating an already existing constraint will fail.
To avoid such an error, `IF NOT EXISTS` can be added to the `CREATE` command.

> This will ensure that no error is thrown and no constraint is created if any other constraint with the given name or another relationship property type constraint on the same schema and property type already existed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will ensure that no error is thrown and that no constraint is created if any other constraint with the given name, or another relationship property type constraint on the same schema and property type, already exists.
```

Author: ✅

.+CREATE CONSTRAINT+
======

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT part_of IF NOT EXISTS
FOR ()-[part:PART_OF]-() REQUIRE part.order IS TYPED INTEGER
----

> Assuming that such a constraint already existed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming that such a constraint already exists:
```

Author: ✅

.Result
[queryresult]
----
(no changes, no records)
----

======

[discrete]
[[constraints-create-an-already-existing-relationship-property-type-constraint]]
=== Creating an already existing constraint will fail

.+CREATE CONSTRAINT+
======

> Create a relationship property type constraint restricting the property `order` to integer values on relationships with the `PART_OF` relationship type, when that constraint already exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a relationship property type constraint restricting the property `order` to integer values on relationships with the `PART_OF` relationship type, when that constraint already exists:
```

Author: ✅

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT belongs_to
FOR ()-[part:PART_OF]-() REQUIRE part.order :: INTEGER
----

> In this case the constraint can not be created because it already exists (but with a different name).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the constraint cannot be created because it already exists (but with a different name).
```

Author: ✅

.Error message
[source, error]
----
Constraint already exists: Constraint( id=24, name='part_of', type='RELATIONSHIP PROPERTY TYPE', schema=()-[:PART_OF {order}]-(), propertyType=INTEGER )
----

======

[discrete]
[[constraints-create-a-different-than-existing-relationship-property-type-constraint]]

> === Creating a constraint when an already existing constraint with different property type will fail

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Creating a constraint when there is an existing constraint with a different property type will fail
```

.+CREATE CONSTRAINT+
======

> Create a relationship property type constraint restricting the property `order` to float values on relationships with the `PART_OF` relationship type, when a relationship property type constraint restricting the property `order` to integer values already exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a relationship property type constraint restricting the property `order` to float values on relationships with the `PART_OF` relationship type, when a relationship property type constraint restricting the property `order` to integer values already exists:
```

Author: ✅

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT order
FOR ()-[part:PART_OF]-() REQUIRE part.order IS :: FLOAT
----

> In this case the constraint can not be created because there exists a conflicting constraint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the constraint cannot be created because there exists a conflicting constraint.
```

Author: ✅

.Error message
[source, error]
----
Constraint already exists: Constraint( id=24, name='part_of', type='RELATIONSHIP PROPERTY TYPE', schema=()-[:PART_OF {order}]-(), propertyType=INTEGER )
----

======

[discrete]
[[constraints-create-a-relationship-that-complies-with-a-property-type-constraint]]
=== Creating a relationship that complies with an existing constraint

.+CREATE RELATIONSHIP+
======

Create a `PART_OF` relationship with an integer `order` property.

////
[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE (franchise:Franchise {name:'MCU'})
----
////

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (movie:Movie {title:'Iron Man'}), (franchise:Franchise {name:'MCU'})
CREATE (movie)-[part:PART_OF {order: 3}]->(franchise)
----

.Result
[queryresult]
----
Set 1 property, created 1 relationship
----

======

[discrete]
[[constraints-create-a-relationship-that-violates-a-property-type-constraint]]
=== Creating a relationship that violates an existing constraint will fail

.+CREATE RELATIONSHIP+
======

> Trying to create a `PART_OF` relationship with a string `order` property, given a property type constraint on relationship type `PART_OF` restricting `order` to integer values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a `PART_OF` relationship with a string `order` property, given a property type constraint on relationship type `PART_OF` restricting `order` to integer values:
```

Author: ✅

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
MATCH (movie:Movie {title:'Captain America: The First Avenger'}), (franchise:Franchise {name:'MCU'})
CREATE (movie)-[part:PART_OF {order: '1'}]->(franchise)
----

> In this case the relationship is not created in the graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the relationship is not because the `order` property is in conflict with an existing constraint.
```

Author: ✅

.Error message
[source, error]
----

> Relationship(0) with type `PART_OF` has property `String("1")` of wrong type `String`. Allowed types: INTEGER

Author: This error message has been updated
```suggestion
Relationship(0) with type `PART_OF` has property `order` of wrong type `String`. Allowed types: INTEGER
```

----

======

[discrete]
[[constraints-fail-to-create-a-property-type-constraint-due-to-existing-relationship]]
=== Creating a constraint when there exist conflicting relationships will fail

.+CREATE CONSTRAINT+
======

> Create a constraint restricting the property `releaseOrder` to integer on relationships with the `PART_OF` relationship type when there already exists a relationship with a string `releaseOrder` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a constraint restricting the property `releaseOrder` to integer values on relationships with the `PART_OF` relationship type, when there already exists a relationship with a string `releaseOrder` property:
```

Author: ✅

////
[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
MATCH (movie:Movie {title:'Captain America: The First Avenger'}), (franchise:Franchise {name:'MCU'})
CREATE (movie)-[part:PART_OF {order: 1, releaseOrder: '5'}]->(franchise)
----
////

.Query
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
CREATE CONSTRAINT release_order
FOR ()-[part:PART_OF]-() REQUIRE part.releaseOrder IS :: INTEGER
----

> In this case the constraint can not be created because it is violated by existing data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the constraint cannot be created because it is in conflict with an existing constraint.
```

Author: same here, the constraint we are trying to create conflicts with the existing graph, not another constraint

✅

Remove the offending relationships and then re-apply the constraint.

.Error message
[source, error]
----
Unable to create Constraint( name='release_order', type='RELATIONSHIP PROPERTY TYPE', schema=()-[:PART_OF {releaseOrder}]-(), propertyType=INTEGER ):

> Relationship(0) with type `PART_OF` has property `String("5")` of wrong type `String`. Allowed types: INTEGER

Author: This error message has been updated
```suggestion
Relationship(0) with type `PART_OF` has property `releaseOrder` of wrong type `String`. Allowed types: INTEGER
```

----

======

> The constraint creation fails on the first offending relationship that are found.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The constraint creation fails on the first offending relationship that is found.
```

----

[role=enterprise-edition]
[[constraints-examples-node-property-type]]
== Node property type constraints

_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.9._

> A node property type constraint ensures that for all nodes with a certain label and property, the property is of the required property type.

Author: Initially from Jens:
This suggestion may be overly simple, but I think it is a little bit easier to follow.
```suggestion
A node property type constraint ensures that a property belonging to certain nodes has the required property type.
```

And my answer:
about the rephrasing: I think this follows the pattern we have in other sections so if we change it here maybe we should also update it for the other constraints

Author: ✅

----

In this case the constraint can't be created because it is violated by existing data.
Remove the offending nodes and then re-apply the constraint.

.Error message
[source, error]
----
Unable to create Constraint( name='movie_franchise', type='NODE PROPERTY TYPE', schema=(:Movie {franchise}), propertyType=STRING ):
Node(0) with label `Movie` has property `franchise` of wrong type `Boolean`. Allowed types: STRING
----

======

The constraint creation fails on the first offending node that is found.
This does not guarantee that there are no other offending nodes in the data.
Therefore, all the data should be checked and cleaned up before re-attempting the constraint creation.

// TODO: re-add this together with type expressions docs
////
This is an example `MATCH` query to find all offending nodes with the wrong property type for the constraint above:

.Query
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (movie:Movie)
WHERE movie.franchise IS NOT :: STRING
RETURN movie
----
////

[role=enterprise-edition]
[[constraints-examples-relationship-property-type]]
== Relationship property type constraints

_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.9._

> A relationship property type constraint ensures that for all relationships with a certain relationship type and property, the property is of the required property type.

Author: Same here, Jens initial version:
```suggestion
A relationship property type constraint ensures that a property belonging to a certain relationship type is of the required property type.
```

Author: ✅
